In the early days of Bitcoin and the blockchain space,
members of the community were testing out different ways to take
advantage of the irreversibility of blockchain to store data.
They figured out that it was possible to place information in
a transaction scriptSig value that didn't alter the end result of the running script.
Users could take some data,
hash it, and then embed the hash into the output.
Now, this led to all sorts of data from photos of Nelson Mandela to
prayers offered for miners to love notes being stored permanently on the blockchain.
Not only did this lead to objectors arguing
that it led to blockchain bloat because it was forcing
full Bitcoin nodes to carry the cost of
the storage for data that was not intended to carry.
But, this also led to transactions with unspendable UTXO.
It's because UTXO had locking scripts that could not be unlocked.
Because these UTXO could never be spent or removed,
Bitcoin nodes will be forced to spend memory to carry them on forever.
Bitcoin core developers introduced the Opcode,
OP_RETURN which allowed 40 bytes to be used in an unspendable transaction,
thus, bypassing the need to store them in the UTXO set.
Even though OP_RETURN outputs are still recorded on the blockchain using memory,
they aren't stored in the UTXO set,
so they don't bloat the UTXO memory pool.
Data using OP_RETURN is saved in the script in this format,
OP_RETURN followed by the data.
Often, the data is some hash the results from SHA256 hashing.
If you want to take a look at OP_RETURN in action,
checkout the first output in this transaction with the hash listed here.
You can view this yourself by connecting to a full Bitcoin node,
and then running the getRawTransaction command.
The data after OP_RETURN is data that's been hashed into a hexadecimal format.
If we convert this hexadecimal to a string,
we'll see that converts to charley loves heidi.
We've seen that it's possible to embed data on the blockchain,
as well as seen how it's done.
But, the question is, is it ethical and should it even be done?
This is a controversial subject that we'll explore more of in the next section.